Add cell-contamination-removal-analysis module (#36)
stjude-dnb-binfcore/sc-rna-seq-snap-10x-Flex: analyses/cell-contamination-removal-analysis/01-cell-contamination-removal.Rmd

body { /* Normal */
  font-size: 16px;
  font-style: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;}

h1 {color: var(--DNB_BINF_Core_color);
    font-size: 28px;
    margin-top: 50px;}

h2 {color: var(--DNB_BINF_Core_color);
    font-size: 20px;}

.list-group-item.active, .list-group-item.active:focus, .list-group-item.active:hover {
  background-color: var(--DNB_BINF_Core_color);}
</style>

<a href="https://wiki.stjude.org/display/CAB">

</a>

\pagebreak

<div class="reporthead"><br/>
**PI: `r params$PI_NAME`**  
**Project: `r params$PROJECT_NAME`**  
Task: `r params$TASK_ID`  
Project Lead(s): `r params$PROJECT_LEAD_NAME`  
Department: `r params$DEPARTMENT`  

<br />  

DNB Bioinformatics Core Analysis Team: 
<br />  

>**Lead Analyst(s): `r params$LEAD_ANALYSTS`**  
>Group Lead: `r params$GROUP_LEAD`  
<br />
>**Contact E-mail:** `r params$CONTACT_EMAIL`  
>**DNB Bioinformatics Core Pipeline:** `r params$PIPELINE`  

Date started: `r params$START_DATE`  
Date completed:  `r params$COMPLETION_DATE`  
Report generated: `r format(Sys.time(), '%H:%M:%S %Z %m/%d/%Y')` \

Reviewed by: _____________________   Date: ____________ \
</div>
\pagebreak
  
# Information about this notebook

> This notebook is relevant to projects in which we need to remove cell contamination from the object, e.g., clusters. After inspection of the two rounds of results in the `cluster-cell-calling` module, the user can remove clusters if necessary. For example, in PDX projects there may be both human and mouse clusters after the `02-find-markers.Rmd` step in `cluster-cell-calling`. We then recommend running the `cell-contamination-removal-analysis` module to drop contaminating clusters and repeat normalization and integration. Point `cell-types-annotation` at this module output when contamination removal is performed (see `README.md` in this folder and root `README.md`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This notebook is relevant to projects in which we need to remove cell contamination from the object, e.g., clusters. After inspection of the two rounds of results in the `cluster-cell-calling` module, the user can remove clusters if necessary. For example, in PDX projects there may be both human and mouse clusters identified after the `02-find-markers.Rmd` step in `cluster-cell-calling`. We then recommend running the `cell-contamination-removal-analysis` module to remove contaminating clusters and repeat normalization and integration. This object can then be used for cell type annotation or other types of analysis (see `README.md` in this folder, documentation in the `yaml` file, and root `README.md`).
```

Author: Updated here: 4eeeff6e0fc4f064f036b605b5e1210f8f71e8d2.

data_file <- file.path(data_dir, glue::glue("seurat_obj_clusters_all.rds"))
palette_file <- file.path(root_dir, "figures", "palettes", "qc_color_palette.tsv")
gradient_palette_file <- file.path(root_dir, "figures", "palettes", "gradient_color_palette.tsv")
metadata_dir <- yaml$metadata_dir
metadata_file <- yaml$metadata_file

# Create results_dir
module_results_dir <- file.path(analysis_dir, "results")
if (!dir.exists(module_results_dir)) {
  dir.create(module_results_dir)}

results_dir <- file.path(module_results_dir, "01_cell_contamination_removal")
if (!dir.exists(results_dir)) {
  dir.create(results_dir)}

# Create plots_dir
module_plots_dir <- file.path(analysis_dir, "plots")
if (!dir.exists(module_plots_dir)) {
  dir.create(module_plots_dir)}

plots_dir <- file.path(module_plots_dir, "01_cell_contamination_removal")
if (!dir.exists(plots_dir)) {
  dir.create(plots_dir)}

source(paste0(root_dir, "/figures/scripts/theme_plot.R"))
source(paste0(upstream_analysis_dir, "/util/function-process-Seurat.R"))
source(paste0(upstream_analysis_dir, "/util/function-create-UMAP.R"))
source(paste0(upstream_analysis_dir, "/util/function-calculate-qc-metrics.R"))
```

# Read seurat object

> First, we use the Seurat object from `01-cluster-cell-calling.Rmd` in `cluster-cell-calling` (`seurat_obj_clusters_all.rds` under results `01_cluster_cell_calling_{resolution_cluster_folder}`). Clusters used for contamination removal use the granularity in params as `resolution_list` (typically the same resolution chosen for markers in `project_parameters.Config.yaml`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we use the Seurat object from `01-cluster-cell-calling.Rmd` in `cluster-cell-calling` (`seurat_obj_clusters_all.rds` under results `01_cluster_cell_calling_{resolution_cluster_folder}`). Clusters used for contamination removal use the granularity in defined in params as `resolution_list` (typically the same resolution chosen for `02-find-markers.Rmd` in the `cluster-cell-calling` module, defined in `project_parameters.Config.yaml`).
```

Author: Updated here: 4eeeff6e0fc4f064f036b605b5e1210f8f71e8d2.

## Perform linear dimensional reduction (PCA) and Run non-linear dimensional reduction (UMAP)
Next we perform PCA on the scaled data. By default, only the previously determined variable features are used as input, but can be defined using features argument if you wish to choose a different subset (if you do want to use a custom subset of features, make sure you pass these to ScaleData first). For the first principal components, Seurat outputs a list of genes with the most positive and negative loadings, representing modules of genes that exhibit either correlation (or anti-correlation) across single-cells in the dataset. Next, we will run UMAP to visualize and explore the data. The goal of non-linear dimensional reduction algorithms is to learn underlying structure in the dataset, in order to place similar cells together in low-dimensional space. Therefore, cells that are grouped together within graph-based clusters determined above should co-localize on these dimension reduction plots.

```{r process-seurat, echo=TRUE}
# Remove previous clustering, UMAP and PC information from metadata
seurat_obj$seurat_clusters <- NULL
seurat_obj@meta.data <- seurat_obj@meta.data %>% 

>   select(-contains(c("UMAPndim", "PC", "snn_res."))) %>% 

Reviewer: Would you also want to remove columns which contain `UMAP` in their name, not just `UMAPndim`? I had not caught this before with the `snap` contamination module, but I noticed now comparing the `01-cluster-cell-calling` results metadata to the `01-cell-contamination` results metadata, it appears there may still be old UMAP columns preserved (which are then carried through in the metadata for all steps of the module).

Author: Thank you for catching this. Yes, this is a great idea to remove the old UMAPs as well.

Author: Updated here: 4eeeff6e0fc4f064f036b605b5e1210f8f71e8d2.
